The Project Gutenberg eBook, Biblical Revision, by Henry Alford


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Biblical Revision
       its duties and conditions


Author: Henry Alford



Release Date: February 6, 2021  [eBook #64470]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIBLICAL REVISION***


Transcribed from the 1870 Strahan & Co. edition by David Price.

                       [Picture: Decorative header]





                            BIBLICAL REVISION
                        Its Duties and Conditions


                                * * * * *

         A SERMON PREACHED IN ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL AT THE SPECIAL
                EVENING SERVICE, ON SUNDAY, MARCH 13, 1870

                                * * * * *

                          BY HENRY ALFORD, D.D.
                           DEAN OF CANTERBURY.

                                * * * * *

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

                                * * * * *

                        STRAHAN & CO., PUBLISHERS
                             56, LUDGATE HILL
                                   1870

                                * * * * *

                       [Picture: Decorative header]

    “Every scribe that is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like
    unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his
    treasure things new and old.”—MATT. xiii. 52.

THE Scribes were the guardians of the law, and its readers and expounders
to the people.  It is related of Ezra, that he was “a ready scribe in the
law of Moses which the Lord God of Israel had given: he had prepared his
heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in Israel
statutes and judgments.”  But in exercising this guardianship the Scribes
were only representing the Church of which they were members.  They were
a class of persons told off for especial attention to this duty, which in
fact belonged to the whole community.  To the Jews as a people, the
Apostle tells us, were committed the oracles of God: and the Church in
all times is the witness and keeper of Holy Writ, as of a sacred deposit
committed to her.  The character assigned in the text to the Scribe
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, belongs, in all its particulars,
to her, who both is the sum, and constitutes the ideal, of all such
guardians and expounders.

With these few preliminary remarks, we may apply our Lord’s words
immediately to ourselves.  The Christian Church throughout the world is
now the guardian of the Holy Scriptures.  All that the Jews had, we have,
with the inestimably precious addition of the New Testament of our Lord
Jesus Christ.  These Scriptures all Christians regard as the revelation
of God to man.  Other works rise and are built up from below: this alone
we receive as let down upon us from above.  All art, all science, all
theology, which is but a system built up by inferences from Scripture,
these are of man, and constructed on earth.  They may rise higher, and
become truer, as one race is advanced in skill or in knowledge; but they
began below, and will ever carry with them the infirmity of all that is
born on earth.  Whereas the sayings and the lessons of this book are not
of man, nor did they take their beginnings here.  They have come to us
indeed through human words, and by means of human action; but they did
not arise originally in the breasts of men; they came from Him who is
Himself the first spring of morals and the highest fountain of truth.
Between philosophy reared up from below, and the facts, and rules, and
motives, which they disclose, there is always a gap which our reason
cannot bridge over.  God’s sovereignty, man’s free will—God’s creative
agency, man’s inductions of science—God’s interference with physical
order, man’s establishment of physical law—one member of each of these
pairs will ever remain discontinuous from, and in the estimate of human
reason irreconcileable with, the other.  And because this Book is unlike
all other books, because its voice comes to us from another place, and is
heard in deeper and more secret chambers of our being than all other
voices, because its sayings have for our humanity a searching and
conserving and healing power which none other possess, therefore it is
that to keep these Holy Scriptures in all their integrity as delivered
down to her is the solemn trust of the Church throughout the world: a
trust simple, direct, indefeasible.

Now when I say the Church throughout the world, and in all I shall say in
these or like terms to-night, I am using the words in their very widest
sense.  I mean by the Church no less than our Article defines it to be,
“the great congregation of faithful men in which the pure Word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments are duly administered according to Christ’s
ordinance.”  I mean the whole body, wherever dwelling, however ordered
and denominated, who take the Scriptures for their rule of life and for
their ultimate appeal.  On the whole of this body rests this trust, to
preserve the purity and integrity of Holy Scripture.

Now of course this duty concerns primarily the Scripture in the form in
which it was given to man: the one sacred text, existing for us at this
day in the very language in which it was originally written.  In plain
words, by way of illustration: if the universal Church were at this day
commanded to lay up a copy of this deposit, as the Law was laid up in the
ark of the Covenant, that one copy would consist of the Old Testament in
Hebrew and the New Testament in Greek.

But now comes in a necessity for the exercise of judgment on the part of
the scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven: in other words, on the
part of the Church.  When we speak of these two sacred texts, we speak in
fact of a store of both.  These texts have been transmitted by human
means.  They exist for us in many forms, coincident in the main, but
varying more or less from one another, principally through infirmities
incident to transcription in ancient times.  The great mass of these
variations concerns matters of relatively small importance.  In primitive
Christian times believers were too intensely employed about the great
interests of the Redeemer’s kingdom, to be very careful about the mere
letter of the Scripture narrative.  Whether in one and the same phrase
our Lord _went_, or _came_, or _journeyed_,—whether He _said_, or
_answered_, or _spoke_, or _answered and said_, was to them small matter:
and thus we have these and hundreds of such as these insignificant
variations in the different ancient manuscript copies of our New
Testament.  But there are, and in no small number, other variations
affecting the sense,—modifying the facts of the history, diverting the
course of argument, changing the tendency of exhortation.  And it is with
regard to these that the Church, trusted as she is with the Scriptures,
is bound to bring things old out of her treasures: to seek back for the
most ancient and best attested of the variations, and to hold that fast
as the text, rejecting the others: or, if none can be found whose
evidence sufficiently preponderates, to publish to all the fact that it
is so.  Less than this will not be a faithful discharge of the trust:
cannot satisfy her feeling of reverence for God’s word.

Now before we can proceed to any application of what has already been
said, we must advance further in the duty of the Church as the Guardian
of Scripture.  The Word of God was not given to be laid up and hidden,
but to go forth and to be understood.  That faith which is to save the
nations, cometh by hearing, and hearing cometh by the Word of God.  But
the nations are not able to understand the Scriptures as they were given.
And therefore it was very early recognised as a duty of each Church to
provide the Scriptures for her members in their own language: to bring
out of her stores not only things old,—the genuine and venerable text of
the word, but also things new,—the new garment or vehicle of that sacred
text, its expression in her vernacular language.  And here let it never
be forgotten, that though we believe Scripture to be a thing divine, a
version, every version, of Scripture must of necessity be a thing human;
must be liable to imperfection and error, and capable of correction and
improvement.  It is in fact, after all, little more than a comment or
speculation upon Scripture.  A few of the simplest considerations serve
to shew this.  Take but these.  In almost every sentence where there is
fervour of feeling, or precision of argument, or graphic description, we
are totally unable to give in the version the living force of the
original.  We are obliged to enquire what is the general sense of that
which is vividly represented, and to devise some English words which will
as nearly as possible convey it to the mind: and thus the power and charm
are lost.  Again, where an original word may have two or more meanings,
giving to the sentence where it occurs a corresponding variety of
applications to life or doctrine; in our rendering we are obliged,
because there is no corresponding word of ours alike fertile in
signification, to exclude all but one of these senses.  On the other
hand, where the original employed some word of but one perfectly plain
sense, we are often constrained to use a term in our tongue which,
bearing an ambiguous meaning, weakens that sense, or even obliterates it
altogether.  Any one may see, from even these scanty hints, how
difficult, how unsatisfactory at the best, must be the discharge of this
portion of the trust: how utterly impossible it is that there should ever
be a perfect or final version of the Scriptures: how the Church, the
Scribe entrusted with the custody and provision of God’s word for the
souls of her members, is bound to bring out of her stores ever from age
to age things new, fresh and more accurate renderings of such phrases of
Scripture as time and use may prove to have been inaccurately
represented.

And observe, before we pass on to the account of our own situation in
these respects, that this duty incumbent on the Church is to be performed
quite irrespectively of any beauty or aptness of outward form which such
rendering may happen to possess.  An erroneous rendering of a Scripture
phrase may have been so well put into words, may carry a sound so terse
and epigrammatic, as to have sunk deep into the mind of a nation and to
have become one of its household sayings.  But who would accept the
excuse of beauty or aptness in the case of anything else wrongly come by?
It is strange that in this case only has any such argument been used and
allowed.

Now we in this land possess a version of the Holy Scriptures which may
challenge comparison for faithfulness, for simplicity, and for majesty,
with any that the world has ever seen.  Perhaps its chief defect is that
it admits of being too highly praised.  Its pure use of our native
tongue, the exquisite balance and music of its sentences, the stately
march of its periods, the hold on the memory taken by the very
alliterations and antitheses, which were the manner of writing when it
was made,—these and a hundred other charms which invest almost every
verse, make us love it even to excess.

And when we intensify all these claims to our affection by the fact that
it has been for centuries, and is now, the vehicle to this great English
race of all that is pure and holy and lovely and of good report, the
first lesson of infancy, the guide of mature life, the comforter of
sickness and death, we can hardly be surprised that many, and some of the
best among us, refuse to see its faults, and are unable to contemplate
with any content the prospect of their being corrected.  It is a spirit
for which we ought to be deeply thankful, this earnest and affectionate
cleaving to the English version of the Scriptures.

But good as it is, there is one thing better.  And that is, the humble
reverence for God’s word, rendering a man willing to make any sacrifice
for the sake, if it may be, of nearer approach to His truth.  And as the
public mind has lately been and now is stirred regarding this matter, I
think it may not be a wrong use of our time to-night, if I venture to
speak to you of that part of the subject which especially belongs to the
pulpit: avoiding details, and trying to remind you in our own case of the
need for thinking of the duty at this time, and of our own means of
performing it; taking into account, by the way, the principal objections
urged against our putting it in hand.

The necessity of thinking of the duty at this time arises from two
causes, setting in contrast our own circumstances with those under which
our version was made: one relating to the things old, the other to the
things new.

When that version was made, rather when it was constructed and amended
out of former ones, the available sources whence the sacred text was to
be derived were very few indeed, and those for the most part not of a
high order.  In almost every case where the real text is matter of doubt,
and has to be ascertained by evidence, our translators had not that
evidence before them.  By far the greater and more important part of it
was not brought to light in any trustworthy form till within the memory
of living men.  Nay, one of its most ancient and principal witnesses has
been within the last few years discovered and given to the Church.  And
the consequence is that, setting aside all cases of indifferent or
unimportant variations, there is by this time an immense weight of
responsibility pressing on the Church with regard to these varieties of
reading: a weight which it seems to me only those can be contented to
rest under, who are not aware of its magnitude.  We, the Churches of
Christ in this land, are causing to be read to our people, to take but a
single very solemn instance, words respecting one of the foundation
doctrines of the faith which are demonstrably no part of Scripture at
all.  And we of the Church of England are doing worse: we are reading
those words by special selection, implying that they convey a proof of
that doctrine, on the Sunday set apart by its name.  This is perhaps the
most prominent example: but there is no lack of others: we might quote
instances where the text found in our English Bibles, which passes
current with millions for the word of God, has but the very slenderest,
if any authority to rest upon, and where other words, which very few of
those millions ever heard of, really are, according to the Church’s own
belief respecting Scripture, the message of God to men.  We might produce
examples again, where the evidence of the great authorities is so nearly
balanced, that to the end of time, if no more witnesses are discovered,
the question never can be decided which of two or more is the true
reading.

Now there is no reason to think that there was any fault in our
translators as regards this matter.  Where they in their time knew of an
important variation, they noted it in their margin, or indicated it by
the type of their text.  But in the great majority of cases, the fact was
not, and could not be, within their knowledge at all.  Upon us in our own
time has it fallen to carry out their principles with the vastly extended
light which God has shed upon us.

But, it is asked, are we able to do this?  As regards the text of the New
Testament, where these variations principally occur, certainly we are.
The whole ground has been of late years thoroughly and repeatedly worked
over, and the evidence is well known.  In many of the most important of
varying passages, the decision of biblical scholars would be shortly and
easily made, which reading to adopt or reject, or whether to take the
middle course of fairly representing the uncertainty.  The number of such
important variations is but limited; and in most of them, the voice of
ancient testimony is all one way.  So that it seems to me there would be
no formidable difficulty, as regards the things old, in setting right at
this time the unavoidable errors, and supplying what were the necessary
defects, of our English Bible.

We now come to the second of the reasons which seem to press on the
Church at this time the duty of reviewing her stewardship of the Holy
Scriptures; and that reason concerns the things new—the form in which
those Scriptures are represented in the vernacular tongue.  In the main,
as has been already said, we have in this respect nothing to regret, and
but very little that we should be compelled to change.  The character and
spirit of our version are all that we can desire.  But it is utterly
impossible for any one capable of judging to deny, that it is disfigured
by numerous blemishes, far too important to be put by or condoned.  The
gravest of these are due to manifest errors in rendering; errors, about
which there could be but one opinion among biblical scholars of all
religious views.  Others have arisen from principles adopted and avowed
by the translators themselves: as, for instance, from the unfortunate one
of allowing a number of apparently equivalent English words an equal
right to represent one and the same word in the original, whereby very
important passages have been disguised and confused.  Others again owe
their source to causes which have come into operation since the version
was made.  Certain words have, as time has gone on, passed into new
meanings.  Others, which could formerly be read without offence, have
now, by their very occurrence, become stumbling-blocks, and tend to
remove all solemnity, and even all chance of fair audience, from the
passages where they occur.  Some few blemishes may also be due (and it is
hardly possible altogether to put by this source) to doctrinal or
ecclesiastical bias on the part of the translator.  Of the various
elements which were wisely united in the body of men entrusted with the
preparation of our version, one was much weakened during the work by the
death of two of its leading members: and some apparently forced or
inconsistent renderings have been thought to be not altogether
unconnected with this circumstance.

But, after all, we are asked, of what character are these blemishes.  Do
they, do any of them, affect points of Christian doctrine?  Now let it be
observed, my brethren, that this question is in itself a fallacious one.
For what is Christian doctrine?  Is it a hard dry tabular statement of
dogmas, to be proved by a certain number of texts? or is it the
conviction of the great truths expressed by those dogmas carried into the
hearts and lives of men?  If it be the former, then might we, according
to the objector’s argument, dispense with nine-tenths of Scripture
altogether.  If the latter, then we can spare nothing which may make it
clearer or more forcible, better apprehended or more warmly felt.  I am
persuaded that no one can estimate the benefit which may be done to the
souls of men by casting light on any one saying of our Blessed Lord,—by
making evident a sentence before obscure in the writings of prophets or
apostles.  And that this may be now done, done in very important
instances, done with easy consent and effectually, I am also persuaded.
The great principles of biblical translation have in our time engaged
many able men both here and on the Continent; and to most of the passages
in which our version has gone astray, our chosen revisers would come with
their minds firmly made up, and ready at once to apply the remedy.  With
regard to some other blemishes which I ventured to mention, its
application would be easier still.  Few would fail to note, or be
desirous to retain, an obsolete word; and in the case of expressions of
the other kind, the only desire would be, while removing the offence, to
leave unimpaired God’s testimony against sin, or whatever might be the
solemn sense of the passage.  As regards the last class of blemishes
mentioned, those few which may be due to doctrinal or ecclesiastical
bias, the task might seem likely to be a hard one.  But I should be
unwilling hastily to think this.  In many such instances, the question,
as it would be raised among our modern scholars, would never enter the
region of opinion at all.  It would be simply one of faithful and
consistent rendering, to which the occurrence of the word elsewhere would
furnish an easy and safe guide.  I trust it may be said of the Church in
our land, that the longer she lasts, the more she becomes aware of the
futility of forcing into the sacred text any foregone conclusions: the
more she sees the importance of keeping pure from all later alloy the
water which men are to draw from the wells of salvation.

We have thus advanced in our very hasty and incomplete sketch of this
subject, to the last branch of enquiry which we proposed: by whom, and
how, this review of the Church’s stewardship may be carried out.

In asking “By whom?” we are in fact putting two questions: under what
sanction, and by what instruments.  To the former enquiry it might be
answered, that inasmuch as uniformity in the use of a Scripture text is
of the first importance, it would be desirable that the version when
amended should be put forth by authority.  But there can be little doubt
that such an answer would be an inconsiderate one.  The procedure would
defeat the very end it has in view.  On only one of the Christian bodies
in this country would such authority, even if complete in her sense, be
binding.  And if the amended version were thus bound upon her, we should
be departing from the precedent set us in the case of our present
version, which, whatever might be the intention of the notice that it is
“appointed to be read in churches,” appears to have made its way to
universal acceptance by its intrinsic excellence, and without any binding
authorisation at all.  There might be various conceivable ways of
undertaking the revision.  It might be entrusted to a body of men
selected and commissioned by the highest power in the land.  Or the
action might begin, as it is now beginning, with one of the religious
bodies among us, and might proceed, not confined to that body alone, but
extended so as to take in such of the rest as might be willing to aid.
But, however undertaken, the result should be put forth to make its way
simply and entirely on its merits, and as approving itself to the
conscience and judgment of the Churches of Christ.  And we are thus
brought to answer the second member of this enquiry, By what instruments
should the revision be carried out?  Our last sentence has anticipated
the reply.  Such a work should no more be done by one section of the
Christian Church than by one man.  The same concurrence and conflict of
thought, the same variety of experience, the same differing shades of
feeling and apprehension, which render many men requisite for the work,
render also many Churches requisite.  There is in the lay mind a natural
and well-founded distrust of men who are enlisted in the warm advocacy of
particular systems: and nothing but a fair balance of the English
Churches in the work would command public confidence.

And then, how should the work be done?  I do not mean, by what kind of
process or machinery: the necessarily arduous details would be best
judged of by those engaged in it: but I mean, guided by what maxims, in
accordance with what rules?  The task may fairly be compared to the
mending and restoration of a goodly piece of ancient mosaic-work.  And
such a comparison may guide us to one leading rule which should dominate
the whole process.  Nothing should be touched of the fair fabric which
can possibly remain: and all that is of necessity new should be in
strictest harmony with the old.  So that the ear, while of course missing
from the altered sentence the expression so long familiar, should find it
superseded, not by a startling modernism, but by words worthy to stand
beside those which remain.  Those who are acquainted with the history of
our present version will recognise in this rule the repetition of one
which its compilers had before them.

On this matter, I conceive there need be no alarm whatever.  Any body of
English biblical scholars, with the responsibility upon them of purifying
our version, would be at least as anxious to preserve its characteristic
excellences as any could be, who were not so deeply aware what those
excellences are.  And let it be observed, that in this matter a version
for public and general use would of necessity differ from such as may
have been put forth for private benefit by individual scholars.  In
those, it may have been desired to give to the English bible-student some
idea of the niceties and precise constructions of the original.  In the
amended version, there should be no such design, unless where our
ordinary English will fully and freely admit of it: no merely grammatical
changes of tense or inference, which might give awkwardness or stiffness
to what was before plainly and conventionally expressed.

From what has already been said, it will be clear that this revision of
the Church’s stewardship cannot be brought about merely by the insertion
of marginal notices or varieties.  We all know how little chance the
margin has of being observed or known: and it would be a still more fatal
objection that, in the great majority of Bibles, the requisite of
cheapness precludes any marginal printing at all.  There might indeed
with advantage be an addition of marginal notices in matters of secondary
importance: but all necessary substantial revision must be made in the
text itself, or it seems to me we are exceeding and not fulfilling our
duty.

There remains but one more consideration, without which we can hardly
dismiss our subject.  Will not, it has been asked, the varying of
expressions in our version tend to disturb that confidence and reliance
with which its words are generally regarded among English Christians?
First I would observe that this argument, as against the discharge of a
solemn trust, is worthless; and secondly, that I have no dread of the
consequence apprehended.  The Church of England has used for two
centuries and a half, two distinct versions of the Psalms, varying to a
degree but little appreciated,—and with no such disturbing result.  It is
not a little remarkable, that a precisely similar objection was raised at
the time of the undertaking of our present version,—but it was by the
Romanists.  They complained of the unsettling effect of these frequent
changes, and of the marginal readings as leaving men in doubt what was
the truth of Scripture.  With what reason, let the firm hold which that
amended version has kept be witness.

And now in drawing to an end, let us ask ourselves, why it is that the
conscience of the Church is moved about this matter? why it is that, a
desire which not long since stirred only in a few breasts, has now become
ripe for practical settlement as to by whom and how it is to be
satisfied?

And the answer is to be sought in that conscience itself.  It brings to
light the estimation in which this Christian people have come to hold the
precious deposit entrusted to them.  It is a result of the awakened
enquiry, the honest fearless research which have been and are being
widely spent upon every point connected with Holy Scripture: a higher
value set, not in spite of but because of that inquiry and research, on a
treasure now no longer wrapped in the disguise of mere conventional
reverence, but opened and sparkling to every eye.  It is the old
confession over again,—no longer from the mouth of one standing in the
prophetic front of his age, but in the hearts of Churches walking in the
fear of God and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost,—“Thy law is tried to
the uttermost: therefore thy servant loveth it.”

In this spirit, and in the depth of this affection, let us contemplate
the work which is proposed, let us undertake it if undertaken it is to
be: refusing to yield our reverence for God’s word to any overweening
love for that to which we have been accustomed, or to let go our present
trust in His guiding Spirit for any timid apprehensions of the peril of
change: but on the other hand doing nothing rashly, nothing uncharitably;
respecting the opinions of our brethren, and dealing tenderly with their
prejudices.

And let us who are anxious for this national work remember above all
things, that it is not by our professions of esteem for God’s word, but
by our proof of them, that distrust will be removed and confidence
inspired: by that word being seen to be the source of our own motives,
and the rule of our life.

                                * * * * *

                                 THE END.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

              PRINTED BY VIRTUE AND CO.  CITY ROAD, LONDON.




THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS WORKS
PUBLISHED BY
STRAHAN & CO.,
56, LUDGATE HILL.


By Henry Alford, D.D.,
DEAN OF CANTERBURY.


1.  THE NEW TESTAMENT.  Authorized Version Revised.  Long Primer Edition,
Crown 8vo., 6s.  Brevier Edition, Fcap. 8vo., 3s. 6d.  Nonpareil Edition,
small 8vo., cloth, 2s.; sewed, 1s. 6d.
2.  ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES, chiefly on Church Subjects.  Demy 8vo., 7s. 6d.
3.  THE YEAR OF PRAYER; being Family Prayers for the Christian Year.
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.; small 8vo., 1s. 6d.
4.  THE WEEK OF PRAYER.  An Abridgment of “The Year of Prayer,” intended
for use in Schools.  Neat cloth, 9d.
5.  THE YEAR OF PRAISE; being Hymns with Tunes for the Sundays and
Holidays of the Year.  Large type, with music, 3s. 6d.; without music,
1s.  Small type, with music, 1s. 6d.; without music, 6d.  Tonic Solfa
Edition, 1s. 6d.
6.  HOW TO STUDY THE NEW TESTAMENT.  Three Vols., small 8vo., 3s. 6d.
each.
7.  EASTERTIDE SERMONS.  Small 8vo., 3s. 6d.
8.  MEDITATIONS: Advent, Creation, and Providence.  Small 8vo., 3s. 6d.



By the Rev. S. J. Andrews.


THE BIBLE STUDENT’S LIFE OF OUR LORD.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.



Edited by the Rev. W. L. Blackley, M.A., and the Rev. James Hawes, M.A.


THE CRITICAL ENGLISH TESTAMENT: Being an Adaptation of Bengel’s Gnomon,
with numerous Notes, showing the Precise Results of Modern Criticism and
Exegesis.  Complete in Three Volumes, averaging 700 pages each.  Crown
8vo., 6s. each.



By Horace Bushnell, D.D.


1.  MORAL USES OF DARK THINGS.  Crown 8vo., 6s.
2.  THE VICARIOUS SACRIFICE, grounded on Principles of Universal
Obligation.  Crown 8vo., 7s. 6d.
3.  CHRIST AND HIS SALVATION, in Sermons variously related thereto.
Crown 8vo., 6s.
4.  NATURE AND THE SUPERNATURAL, as together constituting the One System
of God.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.
5.  THE NEW LIFE.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.
6.  CHRISTIAN NURTURE; or, the Godly Upbringing of Children.  Crown 8vo.,
3s. 6d.
7.  THE CHARACTER OF JESUS.  Limp cloth, 6d.



By Rev. Samuel Cox.


THE RESURRECTION.  Crown 8vo., 5s.



By R. W. Dale, M.A.


WEEK-DAY SERMONS.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.



By Dora Greenwell.


1.  THE COVENANT OF LIFE AND PEACE.  Small 8vo., 3s. 6d.
2.  THE PATIENCE OF HOPE.  Small 8vo., 2s. 6d.



By Thomas Guthrie, D.D.


1.  STUDIES OF CHARACTER FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.
2.  THE PARABLES READ IN THE LIGHT OF THE PRESENT DAY.  Crown 8vo., 3s.
6d.
3.  MAN AND THE GOSPEL.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.
4.  OUR FATHER’S BUSINESS.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.
5.  SPEAKING TO THE HEART.  Crown 8vo., 8s. 6d.
6.  THE ANGELS’ SONG.  18mo., 1s. 6d.
7.  EARLY PIETY.  18mo., 1s. 6d.

SAVING KNOWLEDGE.  Addressed to Young Men.  By THOMAS GUTHRIE, D.D., and
W. G. BLAIKIE, D.D.  Crown 8vo.. 3s. 6d.



By J. S. Howson, D.D.,
DEAN OF CHESTER.


1.  THE METAPHORS OF ST. PAUL.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.
2.  PROPORTION IN RELIGIOUS BELIEF AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICE.  A Sermon
preached at the Consecration of the Bishop of Carlisle.  Demy 8vo., 1s.



By the Rev. John Hunt.


RELIGIOUS THOUGHT IN ENGLAND, from the Reformation to the end of the Last
Century.  Vol. I.  Demy 8vo., 16s.



By the Rev. Edward Irving.


1.  COLLECTED WRITINGS.  Five Vols., demy 8vo., £3.

2.  MISCELLANIES FROM THE COLLECTED WRITINGS.  Post 8vo., 6s.

3.  PROPHETICAL WRITINGS.  Vol. I., demy 8vo., 15s.



By W. Basil Jones,
ARCHDEACON OF YORK.


THE PEACE OF GOD.  Crown 8vo., 5s.



By George MacDonald, LL.D.


UNSPOKEN SERMONS.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.



By Norman Macleod, D.D.


1.  PARISH PAPERS.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.
2.  SIMPLE TRUTH SPOKEN TO WORKING PEOPLE.  Small 8vo., 2s. 6d.



By Austen Phelps.


1.  MAN’S RENEWAL.  Small 8vo., 2s. 6d.
2.  THE STILL HOUR.  Small 8vo., 1s.



By the Rev. E. H. Plumptre, M.A.


1.  BIBLICAL STUDIES.  Post 8vo., 7s. 6d.
2.  CHRIST AND CHRISTENDOM: being the Boyle Lectures for 1866.  Demy
8vo., 12s.
3.  THEOLOGY AND LIFE.  Sermons chiefly on Special Occasions.  Small
8vo., 6s.



By the Rev. A. W. Thorold.


THE PRESENCE OF CHRIST.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.



By the Rev. C. J. Vaughan, D.D.,
MASTER OF THE TEMPLE.


1.  LAST WORDS IN THE PARISH CHURCH OF DONCASTER.  Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.

2.  EARNEST WORDS FOR EARNEST MEN.  Small 8vo., 4s. 6d.

3.  PLAIN WORDS ON CHRISTIAN LIVING.  Small 8vo., 2s. 6d.

4.  CHRIST THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.  Small 8vo., 2s. 6d.

5.  CHARACTERISTICS OF CHRIST’S TEACHING.  Small 8vo., 2s. 6d.

6.  VOICES OF THE PROPHETS, on Faith, Prayer, and Human Life.  Small
8vo., 2s. 6d.



By Alexander Vinet.


OUTLINES OF THEOLOGY.  New and Cheaper Edition.  Post 8vo., 6s.



By Samuel Wilberforce, D.D.,
BISHOP OF WINCHESTER.


HEROES OF HEBREW HISTORY.  Post 8vo., 9s.



By the Rev. John Young, LL.D.


1.  THE CHRIST OF HISTORY.  New and Enlarged Edition.  Crown 8vo., 6s.
2.  THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN.  Post 8vo., 7s. 6d.
3.  THE CREATOR AND THE CREATION.  Crown 8vo., 6s.



Edited by the Right Rev. Alexander Ewing, D.C.L.,
BISHOP OF ARGYLL AND THE ISLES.


          PRESENT-DAY PAPERS ON PROMINENT QUESTIONS IN THEOLOGY.

                  In Monthly Parts, price One Shilling.

1.  THE ATONEMENT.                      4.  THE PRESENT UNBELIEF.

2.  THE EUCHARIST.                      5.  WORDS FOR THINGS.

3.  THE RULE OF FAITH.                  6.  MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS.

                     STRAHAN & CO., 56, LUDGATE HILL.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIBLICAL REVISION***


******* This file should be named 64470-0.txt or 64470-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/4/4/7/64470


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

